.NET TCP => gRPC migration guide for catch-up subscriptions (#498)
EventStore/documentation: docs/clients/dotnet/21.2/migration-to-gRPC.md

```csharp
long? position = GetLastCheckpoint();

_connection.SubscribeToAllFrom(
    position,
    false,
    EventAppeared,
    SubscriptionDropped
);
```

Now you'd need to call different overloads:

```csharp
Position? position = GetLastCheckpoint();

if (streamPosition.HasValue)
{
    await _client.SubscribeToAllAsync(
        position.Value,
        EventAppeared,
        false,
        SubscriptionDropped
    );
}

await _client.SubscribeToAllAsync(
    EventAppeared,
    false,
    SubscriptionDropped
);
```

### Events filtering

EventStoreDB allows you to filter the events whilst you subscribe to the `$all` stream so that you only receive the events that you care about. TCP client provides that option via `FilteredSubscribeToAll` method. As was mentioned above, this method was unified with `SubscribeToAllAsync`. 

Thus, instead of such call in TCP:

```csharp
var filter = Filter.ExcludeSystemEvents;
var filteredSettings = CatchUpSubscriptionFilteredSettings.Default;

_connection.FilteredSubscribeToAllFrom(
    position,
    filter,
    filteredSettings,
    EventAppeared,
    LiveProcessingStarted,
    SubscriptionDropped
);
```

You need to use:

```csharp
var filter = 

>     new SubscriptionFilterOptions (EventTypeFilter.ExcludeSystemEvents())

Reviewer: Missing a semicolon `;`

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/EventStore/documentation/pull/498/commits/d7fecdb737fb69ab7772c041e1a5fb609aee0ebf.

await _client.SubscribeToAllAsync(
    position,
    EventAppeared,
    false,
    SubscriptionDropped,
    filter
);
```

`CatchUpSubscriptionFilteredSettings` and `Filter` classes from the TCP client were merged into single `SubscriptionFilterOptions` in gRPC.

Read more in the [gRPC server-side filtering docs](/clients/grpc/subscriptions.md#server-side-filtering).

### Knowing when live processing started

TCP client provides the possibility to provide a handler that will be called when live processing starts:

```csharp{6}
connection.SubscribeToStreamFrom(
    streamName,
    streamPosition,
    false,
    EventAppeared,
    subscription => Console.WriteLine("Processing live"),
    SubscriptionDropped

> }

Reviewer: It should be a parentheses `)`

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/EventStore/documentation/pull/498/commits/d7fecdb737fb69ab7772c041e1a5fb609aee0ebf.

## Subscriptions
TODO
## Catch-up Subscriptions

> We unified catch-up subscriptions API in the gRPC client. In TCP client, you have multiple methods for subscribing to EventStoreDB, e.g. `SubscribeToStreamAsync`, `SubscribeToStreamFrom`, `FilteredSubscribeToAllAsync` etc. Now you have two main options:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We unified catch-up subscriptions API in the gRPC client. In the TCP client, you have multiple methods for subscribing to EventStoreDB, e.g., `SubscribeToStreamAsync`, `SubscribeToStreamFrom`, `FilteredSubscribeToAllAsync`, etc. Now you have two main options:
```

- subscribing to a single stream using `SubscribeToStreamAsync`,
- subscribing to the `$all` stream using `SubscribeToAllAsync`.

Both methods include overloads for specific configurations and optional parameters with sane defaults. The recommendation is to use the default settings and modify them when needed.

### Positions

> As for other operations, we aligned subscriptions checkpoints/positions handling. Accordingly, as for [reading](#reading-events) instead of using nullable long value, we introduced classes:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As with other operations, we aligned the subscription checkpoint/position handling. Accordingly, for [reading](#reading-events), instead of using `Nullable<Int64>`, we introduced the following types:
```

- `StreamPosition` for a single stream subscription,
- `Position` for the `$all` stream.

Each subscription method has an overload taking either a specific position or the default one (from the start). For instance, if you were previously using a unified approach:

```csharp
long? streamPosition = GetLastCheckpoint();

tcpConnection.SubscribeToStreamFrom(
    streamName,
    streamPosition,
    false,
    EventAppeared,
    SubscriptionDropped
);
```

Now you'd need to call different overloads:

```csharp
StreamPosition? streamPosition = GetLastCheckpoint();

if (streamPosition.HasValue)
{
    await grpcClient.SubscribeToStreamAsync(
        streamName,
        streamPosition.Value,
        EventAppeared,
        false,
        SubscriptionDropped
    );
}

> await grpcClient.SubscribeToStreamAsync(

Reviewer 3: I'd make an explicit if-else in this snippet, I know it's not striclty necessary just  for clarity

Author: I personally try to avoid `else,` but I agree that it's more explicit and more precise in this case. Updated in: https://github.com/EventStore/documentation/pull/498/commits/533a42f79130bf695ab4657b0c00b21570b2c11c.

    streamName,
    EventAppeared,
    false,
    SubscriptionDropped
);
```

Accordingly, you need to perform the same change for subscription to the `$all` stream.

```csharp
long? position = GetLastCheckpoint();

tcpConnection.SubscribeToAllFrom(
    position,
    false,
    EventAppeared,
    SubscriptionDropped
);
```

Now you'd need to call different overloads:

```csharp
Position? position = GetLastCheckpoint();

if (streamPosition.HasValue)
{
    await grpcClient.SubscribeToAllAsync(
        position.Value,
        EventAppeared,
        false,
        SubscriptionDropped
    );
}

> await grpcClient.SubscribeToAllAsync(

Reviewer 3: same as above I'd make it an explicit if-else

Author: I personally try to avoid `else,` but I agree that it's more explicit and more precise in this case. Updated in: https://github.com/EventStore/documentation/pull/498/commits/533a42f79130bf695ab4657b0c00b21570b2c11c.

    EventAppeared,
    false,
    SubscriptionDropped
);
```

### Events filtering

> EventStoreDB allows you to filter the events whilst you subscribe to the `$all` stream so that you only receive the events that you care about. TCP client provides that option via `FilteredSubscribeToAll` method. As was mentioned above, this method was unified with `SubscribeToAllAsync`. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
EventStoreDB allows you to filter the events whilst you subscribe to the `$all` stream so that you only receive the events that you care about. The TCP client provides that option via the `FilteredSubscribeToAll` method. As was mentioned above, this method was unified with `SubscribeToAllAsync`. 
```

Thus, instead of such call in TCP:

```csharp
var filter = Filter.ExcludeSystemEvents;
var filteredSettings = CatchUpSubscriptionFilteredSettings.Default;

tcpConnection.FilteredSubscribeToAllFrom(
    position,
    filter,
    filteredSettings,
    EventAppeared,
    LiveProcessingStarted,
    SubscriptionDropped
);
```

You need to use:

```csharp
var filter = 
    new SubscriptionFilterOptions (EventTypeFilter.ExcludeSystemEvents());

await grpcClient.SubscribeToAllAsync(
    position,
    EventAppeared,
    false,
    SubscriptionDropped,
    filter
);
```

> `CatchUpSubscriptionFilteredSettings` and `Filter` classes from the TCP client were merged into single `SubscriptionFilterOptions` in gRPC.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `CatchUpSubscriptionFilteredSettings` and `Filter` types from the TCP client were unified into single `SubscriptionFilterOptions` in gRPC.
```

Read more in the [gRPC server-side filtering docs](/clients/grpc/subscriptions.md#server-side-filtering).

### Knowing when live processing started

> TCP client provides the possibility to provide a handler that will be called when live processing starts:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The TCP client provides the possibility to provide a handler that will be called when live processing starts:
```

```csharp{6}
tcpConnection.SubscribeToStreamFrom(
    streamName,
    streamPosition,
    false,
    EventAppeared,
    subscription => Console.WriteLine("Processing live"),
    SubscriptionDropped
);
```

> gRPC clients do not provide such a feature. However, you can handle that by comparing the current stream (or the `$all` stream) position with the position of the last received event from the subscription. You also need to define threshold as if the system is alive, then new events will constantly appear, and you might not get into the situation where you're fully caught up (especially for the `$all` stream).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
gRPC clients do not provide such a feature. However, you can handle that by comparing the current stream (or the `$all` stream) position with the position of the last received event from the subscription. You also need to define a threshold. If the system is live, new events will constantly appear, and you might not get fully caught up (especially for the `$all` stream).
```

> You can perform gap measurement in a way as below:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can perform gap measurement:
```

        StreamPosition subscriptionLastPosition,
        CancellationToken cancellationToken
    )
    {
        var getCurrentLastEvent = await grpcClient
            .ReadStreamAsync(
                Direction.Backwards,
                streamName,
                StreamPosition.End,
                1,
                resolveLinkTos: false,
                cancellationToken: cancellationToken
            ).LastAsync(cancellationToken);

        var currentLastPosition = getCurrentLastEvent.Event.EventNumber.ToUInt64();

        return subscriptionLastPosition - currentLastPosition;
    }

    public static async Task<ulong> GetAllStreamSubscriptionGap
    (
        this EventStoreClient grpcClient,
        Position subscriptionLastPosition,
        CancellationToken cancellationToken
    )
    {
        var getCurrentLastEvent = await grpcClient
            .ReadAllAsync(
                Direction.Backwards,
                Position.End,
                1,
                resolveLinkTos: false,
                cancellationToken: cancellationToken
            ).LastAsync(cancellationToken);

        var currentLastPosition = getCurrentLastEvent.Event.Position.CommitPosition;

>         return subscriptionLastPosition.CommitPosition - currentLastPosition;

Reviewer 3: Careful as this is not a gap in number of events , but indirectly in number of bytes

Author: Good catch 👍 I added a note in https://github.com/EventStore/documentation/pull/498/commits/533a42f79130bf695ab4657b0c00b21570b2c11c.

    }
}
```

Having the gap calculated, you can verify if it's below the defined threshold:

```csharp
private const uint SubscriptionThreshold = 10;

public static async Task<bool> IsLive(Func<Task<ulong>> getSubscriptionGap)
{
    var subscriptionGap = await getSubscriptionGap();

    return subscriptionGap < SubscriptionThreshold;
}

```

> You can use such logic in an:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can use this logic in:
```

> - event appeared callback,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- the event appeared callback,
```

> - [checkpoint is reached](/clients/grpc/subscriptions.md#checkpointing) if you're using a filtered subscription. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- the [checkpoint reached callback](/clients/grpc/subscriptions.md#checkpointing) if you're using a filtered subscription. 
```

> You may also consider some performance improvements like checking once per a few events or using cache for reads.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You may also consider some performance improvements like checking once every few events or using a cache for reads.
```

### Resolving linked events

[Projections in EventStoreDB](/server/v21.10/projections/) let you append new events or link existing events to streams. Links won't contain the original event data. ESDB can resolve it automatically depending on the value you passed to the operation call.

> TCP client by default resolved linked events. gRPC changes that behaviour to only resolve them if you ask for that explicitly.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The TCP client by default resolved linked events. gRPC changes that behaviour to only resolve them if you ask for that explicitly.
```

> To do that, you need to pass `true` as `resolveLinkTos` param's value explicitly, e.g. for the regular stream:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To do that, you need to pass `true` to the `resolveLinkTos` param, e.g., for a regular stream:
```
